The Position
Corporate Strategy Lead 

 As the Corporate Strategy Lead, you will report to the Head of Corporate Strategy. You will lead high-impact strategic initiatives and will contribute to and shape the continuous development and implementation of the strategy for the Roche Group and its operating model. By this you will have an influence on the company’s overall strategic, financial and operational performance.

We are currently looking to hire for multiple Corporate Strategy Lead positions within this team. 

You will be a part of a high-performing team, building up strategic expertise and excellence. You will work in a network with the strategy teams across different functions and units in Roche to ensure aligned priorities, an integrated strategic roadmap,  and consistent implementation thereof.  You play a pivotal role in maximizing the overall value delivery of the Roche Corporate strategy unit, unlocking the power of our whole organization and setting Roche up for long-term success. 

Career opportunities and accountabilities within this position include (but are not limited to):

You will provide expertise in current and future healthcare market trends, thought leadership and direction with implications for our Corporate Strategy. 

You will develop and align strategic priorities and objectives, while leading key initiatives and programs linked to these priorities. 

You will build up a strong network across the different strategy groups and further key stakeholders across the organisation in order to create a platform to share, learn and maximize impact  

Further develop and refine aspects of our overarching operating model  and prioritize operating model aspects to be tackled in close collaboration with key stakeholders

You will guide and support upon request different units and functions of Roche in their strategy development and implementation further driving strategic excellence

Are you ready to apply? We are looking for someone who thinks beyond the job offered - someone who can realize the opportunities this role provides as a stepping stone for a successful career at Roche. 

Who you are

 

We're looking for a visionary and versed senior strategist who has proven capability in defining, shaping and embedding corporate strategies to gain maximum impact for the organisation. 

Your background in strategy consultancy and business roles will help you to identify key opportunities for Roche and you will bring expertise and experience in strategy development and implementation in a global, large-scale organisation (e.g. in a strategy consultancy company or within a corporate strategy department of a healthcare/pharmaceutical/diagnostics organization). 

You have a University degree in a relevant discipline and bring 5-8+ years of experience in relevant roles in consulting, strategy roles or business leadership relevant to Healthcare / Pharmaceutical / Diagnostics.

An in-depth understanding of the healthcare sector is mandatory. This includes healthcare systems and trends, market & competitor landscape, new customer groups incl. provider and patients, and associated business models.

 

In addition, you bring the following experience and competencies:

Strong leadership experience: developing diverse, global teams, and matrix leadership at enterprise-level, with practical experience of structuring large programs and coordinating teams 

Systematic thinking and proven problem-solving skills 

Strong experience in strategy development and roll-out at a global and enterprise level, strategic planning and strategic methodologies

Highly developed stakeholder management and people influencing skills, promoting a culture of trust with strong interpersonal skills, work effectively with partners and stakeholders at different levels

Ability to work in a dynamic, fast-moving and agile environment with a good understanding and application of agile methodologies and ways-of-working

 

Up to 25% of the time international business travel may be required depending on ongoing business activities.

Roche embraces diversity and equal opportunity in a serious way. We are committed to building a team that represents a variety of backgrounds, perspectives, and skills. The more inclusive we are, the better our work will be.

Who we are
At Roche, more than 100,000 people across 100 countries are pushing back the frontiers of healthcare. Working together, we’ve become one of the world’s leading research-focused healthcare groups. Our success is built on innovation, curiosity and diversity.

Basel is the headquarters of the Roche Group and one of its most important centres of pharmaceutical research. Over 10,700 employees from over 100 countries come together at our Basel/Kaiseraugst site, which is one of Roche`s largest sites. Read more.

Besides extensive development and training opportunities, we offer flexible working options, 18 weeks of maternity leave and 10 weeks of gender independent partnership leave. Our employees also benefit from multiple services on site such as child-care facilities, medical services, restaurants and cafeterias, as well as various employee events.

We believe in the power of diversity and inclusion, and strive to identify and create opportunities that enable all people to bring their unique selves to Roche.